Security Best Practices: Improve inter-canister calls best practices, add locking recommendations (#945)
dfinity/portal: docs/references/security/rust-canister-development-security-best-practices.md

## Inter-Canister Calls and Rollbacks

### Message Execution Basics

> To understand the issues around async inter-canister calls, one needs to understand a few properties about message execution. This is also explained in the [community conversation on Security Best Practices](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PneRzDmf_Xw&list=PLuhDt1vhGcrez-f3I0_hvbwGZHZzkZ7Ng&index=2&t=4s). A _message_ is a set of consecutive instructions that a subnet executes for a canister. The following properties are essential: 

Reviewer: Could we add the definition of a call?

> **Property 1**: Only a single message is processed at a time. So message execution is sequential, and never parallel.

Reviewer: Should we be more clear an state: A single message per canister.
Not per subnet or even per replica.

Reviewer: Update looks good.

> **Property 2**: Each call (query / update) triggers a message. When an inter-canister call is made, the code after the call (the callback) is executed as a separate message. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Property 2**: Each call (query / update) triggers a message. When an inter-canister call is made, the code after the call (the callback, highlighted in blue) is executed as a separate message. 
```

> For example, consider the following code in Motoko: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, consider the following Motoko code: 
```

Reviewer 2: It's a bit weird that this is a "Rust Canister Development" but we have sample Motoko code

![example_highlighted_code](_attachments/example_highlighted_code.png)

> The first message that is executed here are lines 2-3, until the inter-canister call is made using the `await` syntax (orange box). The second message are lines 3-5: when the inter-canister call returns (blue box). We call this part the _callback_ of the inter-canister call. The two messages involved in this example will always be scheduled sequentially. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first message that is executed here are lines 2-3, until the inter-canister call is made using the `await` syntax (orange box). The second message executes lines 3-5: when the inter-canister call returns (blue box). We call this part the _callback_ of the inter-canister call. The two messages involved in this example will always be scheduled sequentially. 
```

**Property 3**: Messages from interleaving calls have no reliable execution ordering.

> Let's consider the above example code again, and assume the method `example` is called twice in parallel, the resulting calls being Call 1 and Call 2. The following illustration shows two possible message orderings. On the left, the first call's messages are scheduled first, and only then the second call's messages are executed. On the right, we see another possible message scheduling, where the first message of each call are executed first. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's consider the above example code again, and assume the method `example` is called twice in parallel, the resulting calls being Call 1 and Call 2. The following illustration shows two possible message orderings. On the left, the first call's messages are scheduled first, and only then the second call's messages are executed. On the right, we see another possible message scheduling, where the first message of each call are executed first. Your code should result in a correct state regardless of the message ordering.
```

![example_orderings](_attachments/example_orderings.png)

**Property 4**: On a trap / panic, modifications to the canister state for the current message are not applied.

> For example, if a trap in the second message (blue box) of the above example occurs, any canister state changes for that message, even earlier in the blue box, are not applied. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if a trap in the second message (blue box) of the above example occurs, any canister state changes as a result of that message, even earlier in the blue box, are discarded.
```

Reviewer 2: I'd also add a note that changes of the earlier messages in the same call context *are* persisted. So we don't have method-level rollback, which means that intermediate states will get persisted unless there's cleanup code somewhere that tries to fix things.

Reviewer 2: OK, I see that you discuss it in detail in the next subsection, I'd still emphasize that the state changes of earlier callbacks (orange in your example) are not rolled back

### Avoid traps after await

#### Security Concern

Traps / panics roll back the canister state, as described in Property 4 above. So any state change followed by a trap or panic can be risky. This is also an important concern when inter-canister calls are made. If a panic/trap occurs after an `await` to an inter-canister call, then the state is reverted to the snapshot before the inter-canister call callback invocation, and not before the entire call!.

This may e.g. lead to the following issues:

> - If state changes before an inter-canister call leave the state inconsistent and there is a panic after the inter-canister call, this results in inconsistent canister state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- State changes before an inter-canister call leaving the state inconsistent which are followed by a panic after the inter-canister call will result in leaving the canister in an inconsistent state.
```

- In particular, if e.g. part of the canister state is locked before an inter-canister call and released in the callback, the lock may never be released if the callback traps. 

> - Generally, there can be bugs when data is not persisted when the developer expected it to be.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Generally, there can be bugs where data is not persisted when the developer expected it to be.
```

> Note that in Rust, from Rust CDK version 0.5.1, any local variables still go out of scope on panic. This prevents some of the issues above. 

Reviewer: How does this prevent issues?

Reviewer 2: Operations on Rust locks (such as `.lock()` or `.write()`) generally return "guard" values, which, when dropped, release the lock. So if the cleanup call drops the local variables, including the guard values, then the lock is released, so a trap doesn't "posion" the lock.

#### Recommendation

- Watch the [community conversation on Security Best Practices](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PneRzDmf_Xw&list=PLuhDt1vhGcrez-f3I0_hvbwGZHZzkZ7Ng&index=2&t=4s) which shows a concrete example of an issue as described here.

- [Don’t lock shared resources across await boundaries](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html#dont-lock) (from [Effective Rust Canisters](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html))

- [Don’t panic after `await`](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html#panic-await) (from [Effective Rust Canisters](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html))

- See also: "Inter-canister calls" section in [How to audit an Internet Computer canister](https://www.joachim-breitner.de/blog/788-How_to_audit_an_Internet_Computer_canister)

- For context: [IC interface spec on message execution](../ic-interface-spec#message-execution)

### Be aware that there is no reliable message ordering

#### Security Concern

As described in the Message Execution Basics above, messages (but not entire calls) are processed atomically. This can lead to a variety of severe security issues such as:

> * _Time-of-check time-of-use issues._ These occur when some condition on global state is checked before an inter-canister call is made, and then wrongly assuming the condition to still hold when the call returns. For example, one might check if there is sufficient balance on some account, then issue two inter-canister calls (e.g. making transfers). When the second inter-canister call starts, it is possible that the condition checked initially no longer holds, because other ledger transfers may have happened before the callback of the first call is executed (see also Property 3 above). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* _Time-of-check time-of-use issues._ These occur when some condition on global state is checked before an inter-canister call, and then wrongly assuming the condition still holds when the call returns. For example, one might check if there is sufficient balance on some account before making a transfer as part of the callback message. When the second inter-canister call starts, it is possible that the condition which was checked initially no longer holds, because other ledger transfers may have happened before the callback of the first call is executed (see also Property 3 above). 
```

> * _Double-Spending issues._ Such issues occur when a transfer is issued twice, often because of unfavorable message scheduling. For example, suppose we check if a caller is eligible for a refund and if so, transfer some refund amount to them. When the refund ledger call returns successfully, we set a flag in the canister storage indicating that the caller has been refunded. This is vulnerable to double-spending because the refund method can be called twice by the caller in parallel, in which case it is possible that the messages before issuing the transfer (including the eligibility check) are scheduled before both callbacks. A detailed explanation of this issue can be found in the [community conversation on Security Best Practices](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PneRzDmf_Xw&list=PLuhDt1vhGcrez-f3I0_hvbwGZHZzkZ7Ng&index=2&t=4s).   

Reviewer: Isnt't this the same as the time-of-check time-of-use example above?

Reviewer 2: The roughly same class of bugs are usually dubbed "reentrancy bugs" in the Ethereum world. There are quite a few resources on this, so maybe makes sense to mention the connection here?

Author: @oggy-dfin 
> The roughly same class of bugs are usually dubbed "reentrancy bugs" in the Ethereum world. There are quite a few resources on this, so maybe makes sense to mention the connection here?

Makes sense. I extended the first paragraph to account for this. In case you have more links / references you think we should add, please LMK. 

@roelstorms 
> Isnt't this the same as the time-of-check time-of-use example above? It's an instance of such a vulnerability but it's (almost) the same as the example given above.

I agree they are quite similar. Still IMO given the severity of these issues (and since we are actually seeing both problems), I think it may be worth describing both. 

Also, there are some differences: The first issue aims at describing typical TOCTOU (check something, wrongly assume the condition still holds later). The second issue in my view is not exactly of this type, as the it occurs due to reentrancy to the same method directly because of updating the state too late. 

WDYT? If you see a nice way of improving this I'm all in :-)

Reviewer: In the double spending issue you explain that the first step is to check eligibility for a refund.
Then you do the refund and thus the first check should now fail.

So basically, it's a TOC TOU issue but with two calls of the same code. While in general TOC TOU could be different calls affecting common state.

If you wouldn't "check" in the double spending example but retrieve some account balance, store it in a local variable, transfer it (all in separate messages), you would have a double spending issue without explicitly checking some state. So the two categories of problems would look less similar. But in the end, I agree with @oggy-dfin, these are instances of a broader category of vulnerabilities. Your change in the last commit clarifies this. Good for me!

To address issues around message ordering that can lead to bugs, one usually employs locking mechanisms to ensure that e.g. a caller (or anyone) can only execute an entire call (which involves several messages) once at a time. A simple example is also given in the [community conversation](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PneRzDmf_Xw&list=PLuhDt1vhGcrez-f3I0_hvbwGZHZzkZ7Ng&index=2&t=4s) mentioned above. 

The locks would usually be released in the callback. That bears the risk that the lock may never be released in case the callback traps, as we discussed in [Avoid Traps after await](#avoid-traps-after-await). In Rust, there is a nice pattern to avoid this issue by using Rust's `Drop` implementation. The example code below shows how one can implement a lock per caller (`CallerGuard`) with a `Drop` implementation. From Rust CDK version 0.5.1, any local variables still go out of scope if the callback traps, so the lock on the caller is released even in that case. This pattern can be extended e.g. to work for the following use cases:

> 

Reviewer: I would move the "extensions" to after the code block to not confuse readers that these extensions might already be in the example.

Reviewer: The drop is always called, even if an inter canister call never responds or responds with an error?

Author: > I would move the "extensions" to after the code block to not confuse readers that these extensions might already be in the example.

Agreed, that's better. done. 

> The drop is always called, even if an inter canister call never responds or responds with an error?

Yes, 'never responds' can actually not happen due to the messaging model of the IC. If a call responds with an error, normal execution of the callback proceeds and the values are dropped when they go out of scope. The most special case are the traps, which actually use that CDK feature to manually trigger the on_cleanup to ensure drop is also called.

- Generally, there can be bugs when data is not persisted when the developer expected it to be.

Note that in Rust, from Rust CDK version 0.5.1, any local variables still go out of scope on panic. This prevents some of the issues above. 

#### Recommendation

- Watch the [community conversation on Security Best Practices](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PneRzDmf_Xw&list=PLuhDt1vhGcrez-f3I0_hvbwGZHZzkZ7Ng&index=2&t=4s) which shows a concrete example of an issue as described here.

- [Don’t lock shared resources across await boundaries](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html#dont-lock) (from [Effective Rust Canisters](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html))

- [Don’t panic after `await`](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html#panic-await) (from [Effective Rust Canisters](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html))

- See also: "Inter-canister calls" section in [How to audit an Internet Computer canister](https://www.joachim-breitner.de/blog/788-How_to_audit_an_Internet_Computer_canister)

- For context: [IC interface spec on message execution](../ic-interface-spec#message-execution)

> ### Be aware that there is no reliable message ordering

Reviewer 2: How about also raising awareness that there is no reliable messaging? The IC can fail any inter-canister call even if both the sender and the receiver are up and have sufficient cycles (because IC-internal data structures get full or whatever). So the canisters always have to handle the failure of such a call.

Reviewer 2: Thanks! I like the text you wrote, but I think we should also state this as a basic property of our messaging, since, well, it is a property of our messaging :) I added a couple of suggestions

Author: That makes sense. Added your suggestions. Thanks!

## Inter-Canister Calls and Rollbacks

### Message Execution Basics

To understand the issues around async inter-canister calls, one needs to understand a few properties about message execution. This is also explained in the [community conversation on Security Best Practices](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PneRzDmf_Xw&list=PLuhDt1vhGcrez-f3I0_hvbwGZHZzkZ7Ng&index=2&t=4s). 

We fist provide a few definitions. A _call_ is a canister's implementation of either an [update](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#http-call) or [query call](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#http-query) that it exposes. For example, if the Rust CDK is used, these are usually annotated with `#[query]` or `#[update]`, respectively. A _message_ is a set of consecutive instructions that a subnet executes for a canister. We'll see in the following that a call can be split into several messages if inter-canister calls are made. The following properties are essential: 

**Property 1**: Only a single message is processed at a time in a subnet. So message execution is sequential, and never parallel.

> **Property 2**: Each call (query / update) triggers a message. When an inter-canister call is made, the code after the call (the callback, highlighted in blue) is executed as a separate message. 

Reviewer 2: I think this isn't entirely correct, though I'm not a 100% as I don't understand all the details around the CDK implementation: if your method issues a call, but it doesn't `.await` on the result, I *think* the code after the call would be executed in the same message. I'm even less sure about Motoko.

![example_orderings](_attachments/example_orderings.png)

**Property 4**: On a trap / panic, modifications to the canister state for the current message are not applied.

For example, if a trap in the second message (blue box) of the above example occurs, canister state changes resulting from that message, even earlier in the blue box, are discarded. However, note that any state changes from earlier messages and in particular the first message (orange box) have been applied, as that message executed successfully. 

For more details, refer to the Interface Specification [section on ordering guarantees](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#ordering_guarantees) and the section on [abstract behaviour](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#abstract-behavior) which defines message execution in more detail. 

> 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

**Property 5**: Inter-canister messaging is not reliable.

Every inter-canister call is guaranteed to receive a response. However, the response does not have to be successful, but can also be a reject response. The reject may come from the called canister, but it may also be generated by the Internet Computer. Such system-generated rejects can occur at any time, and cannot be controlled by canister authors. Thus, it's important that the calling canister handles reject responses as well. Note that a reject response generally guarantees that the message had not been processed by the called canister.
```

Author: Nice, added it as suggested. Thanks!

### Avoid traps after await

#### Security Concern

Traps / panics roll back the canister state, as described in Property 4 above. So any state change followed by a trap or panic can be risky. This is also an important concern when inter-canister calls are made. If a panic/trap occurs after an `await` to an inter-canister call, then the state is reverted to the snapshot before the inter-canister call callback invocation, and not before the entire call!.

This may e.g. lead to the following issues:

> - Suppose some state changes are applied and then an inter-canister call is issued. Also, assume that these state changes leave the canister in an inconsistent state, and that state is only made consistent again in the callback. Now if there is a trap in the callback, this leaves the canister in an inconsistent state. 

Reviewer 2: It'd be great if we could give a short concrete example. I could cook something up, but maybe you have a concrete one from your reviews?

Author: Yes that makes sense! Added this concrete example:
* _A concrete bug of this kind is the following. Assume an inter-canister call is issued to transfer funds. In the callback, the canister accounts for having made that transfer by reflecting that fact the canister storage. However, suppose the callback also updates some usage statistics data, which eventually leads to a trap when some data structure becomes full. As soon as that is the case, the canister ends up in an inconsistent state because the state changes in the callback are no longer applied and thus the transfers are not correctly accounted for._

#### Recommendation

- Watch the [community conversation on Security Best Practices](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PneRzDmf_Xw&list=PLuhDt1vhGcrez-f3I0_hvbwGZHZzkZ7Ng&index=2&t=4s) which shows a concrete example of an issue as described here.

- [Don’t lock shared resources across await boundaries](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html#dont-lock) (from [Effective Rust Canisters](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html))

- [Don’t panic after `await`](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html#panic-await) (from [Effective Rust Canisters](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html))

- See also: "Inter-canister calls" section in [How to audit an Internet Computer canister](https://www.joachim-breitner.de/blog/788-How_to_audit_an_Internet_Computer_canister)

- For context: [IC interface spec on message execution](../ic-interface-spec#message-execution)

### Be aware that there is no reliable message ordering

#### Security Concern

> As described in the [Message Execution Basics](#message-execution-basics) above, messages (but not entire calls) are processed atomically. These issues are generally called 'Reentrancy bugs' (see e.g. the [Ethereum Best Practices on Reentrancy](https://consensys.github.io/smart-contract-best-practices/attacks/reentrancy/)). Note however that the messaging guarantees (and thus the bugs) on the Internet Computer are different from Ethereum. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As described in the [Message Execution Basics](#message-execution-basics) above, messages (but not entire calls) are processed atomically. Thus, the state of the canister may change between the time an inter-canister call is started and the time when it returns, which may lead to issues if not handled correctly. These issues are generally called 'Reentrancy bugs' (see e.g. the [Ethereum Best Practices on Reentrancy](https://consensys.github.io/smart-contract-best-practices/attacks/reentrancy/)). Note however that the messaging guarantees (and thus the bugs) on the Internet Computer are different from Ethereum. 
```

Author: Done. 👍

    
        #[test]
        fn should_release_guard_on_drop() {
            let principal = Principal::anonymous();
            {
                let caller_guard = CallerGuard::new(principal);
                assert!(caller_guard.is_ok());
            } // drop caller_guard as it goes out of scope here
            // it is possible to get a guard again:
            assert!(CallerGuard::new(principal).is_ok());
        }
    }

This pattern can be extended e.g. to work for the following use cases:

* A global lock that does not only lock per caller. For this, set a boolean flag in the canister state instead of using a `BTreeSet<Principal>`.
* A guard that makes sure that only a limited number of principals are allowed to execute a method at the same time. For this, one can return an error in `CallerGuard::new()` in case `pending_requests.len() >= MAX_NUM_CONCURRENT_REQUESTS`.
* A guard that limits the number of times a method can be called in parallel. For this, use a counter in the canister state that is checked and increased in `CallerGuard::new()` and decreased in `Drop`.

Finally, note that the same guard can be used in several methods to restrict parallel execution of them.

> ### Be aware that there is no reliable messaging

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
### Handle rejected inter-canister calls correctly
```

Author: Done. 👍

#### Security Concern

> If an inter-canister call is successful, it returns _reply_ (in case of success). However, inter-canister calls can fail in which case they result in a _reject_. See [reject codes](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#reject-codes) for more detail. The caller must correctly deal with the reject cases, as they can happen in normal operation, e.g. because of insufficient cycles on the sender or receiver side, or because some data structures (like message queues) are full.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As stated by the Property 5 above, inter-canister calls can fail in which case they result in a _reject_. See [reject codes](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#reject-codes) for more detail. The caller must correctly deal with the reject cases, as they can happen in normal operation, e.g. because of insufficient cycles on the sender or receiver side, or because some data structures (like message queues) are full.
```

Author: Done. 👍

## Inter-Canister Calls and Rollbacks

### Message Execution Basics

To understand the issues around async inter-canister calls, one needs to understand a few properties about message execution. This is also explained in the [community conversation on Security Best Practices](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PneRzDmf_Xw&list=PLuhDt1vhGcrez-f3I0_hvbwGZHZzkZ7Ng&index=2&t=4s). 

> We fist provide a few definitions. A _call_ is a canister's implementation of either an [update](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#http-call) or [query call](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#http-query) that it exposes. For example, if the Rust CDK is used, these are usually annotated with `#[query]` or `#[update]`, respectively. A _message_ is a set of consecutive instructions that a subnet executes for a canister. We'll see in the following that a call can be split into several messages if inter-canister calls are made. The following properties are essential: 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We fist provide a few definitions. A _call_ is a canister's implementation of either an [update](../ic-interface-spec.md#http-call) or [query call](../ic-interface-spec.md#http-query) that it exposes. For example, if the Rust CDK is used, these are usually annotated with `#[query]` or `#[update]`, respectively. A _message_ is a set of consecutive instructions that a subnet executes for a canister. We'll see in the following that a call can be split into several messages if inter-canister calls are made. The following properties are essential: 
```
relative links including file extension, please. Otherwise links don't work or get broken without detecting it.

**Property 1**: Only a single message is processed at a time in a subnet. So message execution is sequential, and never parallel.

**Property 2**: Each call (query / update) triggers a message. When an inter-canister call is made using `await`, the code after the call (the callback, highlighted in blue) is executed as a separate message. 

Note that if the code does not `await` the response, the code after the callback (until the next inter-canister call is triggered using `await`) is executed in the same message.

For example, consider the following Motoko code: 

> ![example_highlighted_code](_attachments/example_highlighted_code.png)

Reviewer 3: Not wrong, but using a Motoko example in Rust best practices is a bit weird

**Property 3**: Messages from interleaving calls have no reliable execution ordering.

Let's consider the above example code again, and assume the method `example` is called twice in parallel, the resulting calls being Call 1 and Call 2. The following illustration shows two possible message orderings. On the left, the first call's messages are scheduled first, and only then the second call's messages are executed. On the right, we see another possible message scheduling, where the first messages of each call are executed first. Your code should result in a correct state regardless of the message ordering.

![example_orderings](_attachments/example_orderings.png)

**Property 4**: On a trap / panic, modifications to the canister state for the current message are not applied.

For example, if a trap in the second message (blue box) of the above example occurs, canister state changes resulting from that message, even earlier in the blue box, are discarded. However, note that any state changes from earlier messages and in particular the first message (orange box) have been applied, as that message executed successfully. 

**Property 5**: Inter-canister messaging is not reliable.

> Every inter-canister call is guaranteed to receive a response. However, the response does not have to be successful, but can also be a reject response. The reject may come from the called canister, but it may also be generated by the Internet Computer. Such system-generated rejects can occur at any time, and cannot be controlled by canister authors. Thus, it's important that the calling canister handles reject responses as well. Note that a reject response generally guarantees that the message had not been processed by the called canister.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Every inter-canister call is guaranteed to receive a response. However, the response does not have to be successful, but can also be a reject response. The reject may come from the called canister, but it may also be generated by the Internet Computer. Such system-generated rejects can occur at any time, and cannot be controlled by canister authors. Thus, it's important that the calling canister handles reject responses as well. Note that a reject response generally guarantees that the message had not been processed successfully by the called canister.
```

It could have been processed, but not to completion, right? Or is that unnecessary nitpicking?

> For more details, refer to the Interface Specification [section on ordering guarantees](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#ordering_guarantees) and the section on [abstract behaviour](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#abstract-behavior) which defines message execution in more detail. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For more details, refer to the Interface Specification [section on ordering guarantees](../ic-interface-spec.md#ordering_guarantees) and the section on [abstract behaviour](../ic-interface-spec.md#abstract-behavior) which defines message execution in more detail. 
```

### Avoid traps after await

#### Security Concern

> Traps / panics roll back the canister state, as described in Property 4 above. So any state change followed by a trap or panic can be risky. This is also an important concern when inter-canister calls are made. If a panic/trap occurs after an `await` to an inter-canister call, then the state is reverted to the snapshot before the inter-canister call callback invocation, and not before the entire call!.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Traps / panics roll back the canister state, as described in Property 4 above. So any state change followed by a trap or panic can be risky. This is also an important concern when inter-canister calls are made. If a panic/trap occurs after an `await` to an inter-canister call, then the state is reverted to the snapshot before the inter-canister call callback invocation, and not before the entire call!
```

This may e.g. lead to the following issues:

- Suppose some state changes are applied and then an inter-canister call is issued. Also, assume that these state changes leave the canister in an inconsistent state, and that state is only made consistent again in the callback. Now if there is a trap in the callback, this leaves the canister in an inconsistent state.

> - A concrete bug of this kind is the following. Assume an inter-canister call is issued to transfer funds. In the callback, the canister accounts for having made that transfer by reflecting that fact the canister storage. However, suppose the callback also updates some usage statistics data, which eventually leads to a trap when some data structure becomes full. As soon as that is the case, the canister ends up in an inconsistent state because the state changes in the callback are no longer applied and thus the transfers are not correctly accounted for. 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- A concrete bug of this kind is the following. Assume an inter-canister call is issued to transfer funds. In the callback, the canister accounts for having made that transfer by reflecting that fact in the canister storage. However, suppose the callback also updates some usage statistics data, which eventually leads to a trap when some data structure becomes full. As soon as that is the case, the canister ends up in an inconsistent state because the state changes in the callback are no longer applied and thus the transfers are not correctly accounted for. 
```
may be easier to understand with a concrete code example

Author: Good point. I included the example code from the community conversation here (as an image) and also link to the community conversation that discusses this issue.

#### Recommendation

- Watch the [community conversation on Security Best Practices](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PneRzDmf_Xw&list=PLuhDt1vhGcrez-f3I0_hvbwGZHZzkZ7Ng&index=2&t=4s) which shows a concrete example of an issue as described here.

- [Don’t lock shared resources across await boundaries](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html#dont-lock) (from [Effective Rust Canisters](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html))

- [Don’t panic after `await`](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html#panic-await) (from [Effective Rust Canisters](https://mmapped.blog/posts/01-effective-rust-canisters.html))

- See also: "Inter-canister calls" section in [How to audit an Internet Computer canister](https://www.joachim-breitner.de/blog/788-How_to_audit_an_Internet_Computer_canister)

> - For context: [IC interface spec on message execution](../ic-interface-spec#message-execution)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- For context: [IC interface spec on message execution](../ic-interface-spec.md#message-execution)
```

Author: Done.

            {
                let caller_guard = CallerGuard::new(principal);
                assert!(caller_guard.is_ok());
            } // drop caller_guard as it goes out of scope here
            // it is possible to get a guard again:
            assert!(CallerGuard::new(principal).is_ok());
        }
    }

This pattern can be extended e.g. to work for the following use cases:

* A global lock that does not only lock per caller. For this, set a boolean flag in the canister state instead of using a `BTreeSet<Principal>`.
* A guard that makes sure that only a limited number of principals are allowed to execute a method at the same time. For this, one can return an error in `CallerGuard::new()` in case `pending_requests.len() >= MAX_NUM_CONCURRENT_REQUESTS`.
* A guard that limits the number of times a method can be called in parallel. For this, use a counter in the canister state that is checked and increased in `CallerGuard::new()` and decreased in `Drop`.

Finally, note that the same guard can be used in several methods to restrict parallel execution of them.

### Handle rejected inter-canister calls correctly

#### Security Concern

> As stated by the Property 5 above, inter-canister calls can fail in which case they result in a _reject_. See [reject codes](https://internetcomputer.org/docs/current/references/ic-interface-spec/#reject-codes) for more detail. The caller must correctly deal with the reject cases, as they can happen in normal operation, e.g. because of insufficient cycles on the sender or receiver side, or because some data structures (like message queues) are full.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As stated by the Property 5 above, inter-canister calls can fail in which case they result in a _reject_. See [reject codes](../ic-interface-spec.md#reject-codes) for more detail. The caller must correctly deal with the reject cases, as they can happen in normal operation, e.g. because of insufficient cycles on the sender or receiver side, or because some data structures (like message queues) are full.
```

Author: Done.

## Inter-Canister Calls and Rollbacks

### Message Execution Basics

To understand the issues around async inter-canister calls, one needs to understand a few properties about message execution. This is also explained in the [community conversation on Security Best Practices](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PneRzDmf_Xw&list=PLuhDt1vhGcrez-f3I0_hvbwGZHZzkZ7Ng&index=2&t=4s). 

We fist provide a few definitions. A _call_ is a canister's implementation of either an [update](../ic-interface-spec.md#http-call) or [query call](../ic-interface-spec.md#http-query) that it exposes. For example, if the Rust CDK is used, these are usually annotated with `#[query]` or `#[update]`, respectively. A _message_ is a set of consecutive instructions that a subnet executes for a canister. We'll see in the following that a call can be split into several messages if inter-canister calls are made. The following properties are essential: 

> **Property 1**: Only a single message is processed at a time in a subnet. So message execution is sequential, and never parallel.

Author: @domwoe as discussed, canisters are indeed [executed on multiple threads](https://sourcegraph.com/github.com/dfinity/ic@79b1d8cb9353ae28a5b9334dcc9fba6ab38f5b9e/-/blob/rs/execution_environment/src/scheduler.rs?L743). So I adapted the text to say 'per canister' and not 'per subnet'.
